The Voynich manuscript is an illustrated codex 
hand-written in an unknown writing system. The 
vellum on which it is written has been 
carbon-dated to the early 15th century 
(1404–1438), and it may have been composed in 
Northern Italy during the Italian Renaissance. The 
manuscript is named after Wilfrid Voynich, a 
Polish book dealer who purchased it in 1912. 

Some of the pages are missing, with around 240 
remaining. The text is written from left to right, 
and most of the pages have illustrations or 
diagrams. Some pages are foldable sheets. 

The Voynich manuscript has been studied by many 
professional and amateur cryptographers, including 
American and British codebreakers from both World 
War I and World War II. No one has yet 
demonstrably deciphered the text, and it has 
become a famous case in the history of 
cryptography. The mystery of the meaning and 
origin of the manuscript has excited the popular 
imagination, making the manuscript the subject of 
novels and speculation. None of the many 
hypotheses proposed over the last hundred years 
has yet been independently verified. 

In 1969 the Voynich manuscript was donated by Hans 
P. Kraus to Yale University's Beinecke Rare Book 
and Manuscript Library, where it is catalogued 
under call number MS 408. 

Description 

Codicology 

The codicology, or physical characteristics of the 
manuscript, has been studied by researchers. The 
manuscript measures 23.5 by 16.2 by 5 cm (9.3 by 
6.4 by 2.0 in), with hundreds of vellum pages 
collected into 18 quires (units of 25 pages). The 
total number of pages is around 240, but the exact 
number depends on how the manuscript's unusual 
foldouts are counted. The quires have been 
numbered from 1 to 20 in various locations, using 
numerals consistent with the 1400s, and the top 
righthand corner of each recto (righthand) page 
has been numbered from 1 to 116, using numerals of 
a later date. From the various numbering gaps in 
the quires and pages, it seems likely that in the 
past the manuscript had at least 272 pages in 20 
quires, some of which were already missing when 
Wilfrid Voynich acquired the manuscript in 1912. 
There is strong evidence that many of the book's 
bifolios were reordered at various points in its 
history, and that the original page order may well 
have been quite different from what it is today. 

Parchment, covers, and binding 

Radiocarbon dating of samples from various parts 
of the manuscript was performed at the University 
of Arizona in 2009. The results were consistent 
for all samples tested and indicated a date for 
the parchment between 1404 and 1438. Protein 
testing in 2014 revealed that the parchment was 
made from calf skin, and multispectral analysis 
showed that it was unwritten on before the 
manuscript was created. The parchment was created 
with care, but deficiencies exist and the quality 
is assessed as average, at best. 

Some folios are thicker than the usual parchment 
thickness, such as bifolios 42 and 47. 

The goat skin binding and covers are not original 
to the book, but date to its possession by the 
Collegio Romano. Insect holes are present on the 
first and last folios of the manuscript in the 
current order and suggest that a wooden cover was 
present before the later covers, and discolouring 
on the edges points to a tanned-leather inside 
cover. 

Ink 

Many pages contain substantial drawings or charts 
which are colored with paint. Based on modern 
analysis using polarized light microscopy (PLM), 
it has been determined that a quill pen and iron 
gall ink were used for the text and figure 
outlines; the colored paint was applied (somewhat 
crudely) to the figures, possibly at a later date. 
The ink of the drawings, text and page and quire 
numbers had similar microscopic characteristics. 
Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) 
performed in 2009 revealed that the inks contained 
major amounts of iron, sulfur, potassium, calcium 
and carbon and trace amounts of copper and 
occasionally zinc. EDS did not show the presence 
of lead, while X-ray Diffraction (XRD) identified 
potassium lead oxide, potassium hydrogen sulphate 
and syngenite in one of the samples tested. The 
similarity between the drawing inks and text inks 
suggested a contemporaneous origin. 

Paint 

The blue, clear (or white), red-brown, and green 
paints of the manuscript have been analyzed using 
PLM, XRD, EDS, and scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM). The blue paint proved to be ground azurite 
with minor traces of the copper oxide cuprite. The 
clear paint is likely a mixture of eggwhite and 
calcium carbonate, while the green paint is 
tentatively characterized by copper and 
copper-chlorine resinate; the crystalline material 
might be atacamite or another copper-chlorine 
compound. Analysis of the red-brown paint 
indicated a red ochre with the crystal phases 
hematite and iron sulfide. Minor amounts of lead 
sulfide and palmierite were possibly present in 
the red-brown paint. The pigments were considered 
inexpensive. 

Retouching 

Computer scientist Jorge Stolfi of the University 
of Campinas highlighted that parts of the text and 
drawings are modified, using darker ink over a 
fainter earlier script. Evidence for this is 
visible in various folios, for example f1r, f3v, 
f26v, f57v, f67r2, f71r, f72v1, f72v3 and f73r. 

Text 

Every page in the manuscript contains text, mostly 
in an unidentified language, but some have 
extraneous writing in Latin script. The bulk of 
the text in the 240-page manuscript is written in 
an unknown script, running left to right. Most of 
the characters are composed of one or two simple 
pen strokes. Some dispute exists as to whether 
certain characters are distinct, but a script of 
20–25 characters would account for virtually all 
of the text; the exceptions are a few dozen rarer 
characters that occur only once or twice each. 
There is no obvious punctuation. 

Much of the text is written in a single column in 
the body of a page, with a slightly ragged right 
margin and paragraph divisions and sometimes with 
stars in the left margin. Other text occurs in 
charts or as labels associated with illustrations. 
There are no indications of any errors or 
corrections made at any place in the document. The 
ductus flows smoothly, giving the impression that 
the symbols were not enciphered; there is no delay 
between characters, as would normally be expected 
in written encoded text. 

The text consists of over 170,000 characters, with 
spaces dividing the text into about 35,000 groups 
of varying length, usually referred to as "words" 
or "word tokens" (37,919); 8,114 of those words 
are considered unique "word types". The structure 
of these words seems to follow phonological or 
orthographic laws of some sort; for example, 
certain characters must appear in each word (like 
English vowels), some characters never follow 
others, or some may be doubled or tripled, but 
others may not.[citation needed] The distribution 
of letters within words is also rather peculiar; 
some characters occur only at the beginning of a 
word, some only at the end, and some always in the 
middle section.[citation needed] Professor Gonzalo 
Rubio, an expert in ancient languages at 
Pennsylvania State University, stated, "the things 
we know as 'grammatical markers' – things that 
occur commonly at the beginning or end of words, 
such as 's' or 'd' in our language, and that are 
used to express grammar, never appear in the 
middle of 'words' in the Voynich manuscript. 
That's unheard of for any Indo-European, Hungarian 
or Finnish language." Many researchers have 
commented upon the highly regular structure of the 
words. The distribution of letters within the text 
is also strange; the chronology presents unknown 
correlations among European languages, partly 
found in Chinese, according to a study by Stephan 
Vonfelt. 

Some words occur in only certain sections, or in 
only a few pages; others occur throughout the 
manuscript. There are very few repetitions among 
the thousand or so labels attached to the 
illustrations. There are practically no words with 
fewer than two letters or more than ten. There are 
instances where the same common word appears up to 
three times in a row. Words that differ by only 
one letter also repeat with unusual frequency, 
causing single-substitution alphabet decipherings 
to yield babble-like text. In 1962, cryptanalyst 
Elizebeth Friedman described such attempts as 
"doomed to utter frustration". 

Various transcription alphabets have been created 
to equate the Voynich characters with Latin 
characters to help with cryptanalysis, such as the 
European Voynich Alphabet. The first major one was 
created by cryptographer William F. Friedman in 
the 1940s, where each line of the manuscript was 
transcribed to an IBM punch card to make it 
machine readable. 

Extraneous writing 

Only a few words in the manuscript are considered 
to be not written in the unknown script: 

f1r: A sequence of Latin letters in the right 
margin parallel with characters from the unknown 
script, also the now unreadable signature of 
"Jacobj à Tepenece" is found in the bottom 
margin. 

f17r: A line of writing in the Latin script in the 
top margin 

f70v–f73v: The astrological series of diagrams 
in the astronomical section has the names of 10 of 
the months (from March to December) written in 
Latin script, with spelling suggestive of the 
medieval languages of France, northwest Italy, or 
the Iberian Peninsula 

f66r: A small number of words in the bottom left 
corner near a drawing of a nude man have been read 
as "der musz del", a High German phrase for a 
widow's share. 

f116v: Four lines written in rather distorted 
Latin script, except for two words in the unknown 
script. The words in Latin script appear to be 
distorted with characteristics of the unknown 
language. The lettering resembles European 
alphabets of the late 14th and 15th centuries, but 
the words do not seem to make sense in any 
language. 

Whether these bits of Latin script were part of 
the original text or were added later is not 
known. 

Illustrations 

The illustrations are conventionally used to 
divide most of the manuscript into six different 
sections, since the text itself cannot be read. 
Each section is typified by illustrations with 
different styles and supposed subject matter 
except for the last section, in which the only 
drawings are small stars in the margin. The 
following are the sections and their conventional 
names: 

Herbal, 112 folios: Each page displays one or two 
plants and a few paragraphs of text, a format 
typical of European herbals of the time. Some 
parts of these drawings are larger and cleaner 
copies of sketches seen in the "pharmaceutical" 
section. None of the plants depicted are 
unambiguously identifiable. 

Astronomical, 21 folios: Contains circular 
diagrams suggestive of astronomy or astrology, 
some of them with suns, moons, and stars. One 
series of 12 diagrams depicts conventional symbols 
for the zodiacal constellations (two fish for 
Pisces, a bull for Taurus, a hunter with crossbow 
for Sagittarius, etc.). Each of these has 30 
female figures arranged in two or more concentric 
bands. Most of the females are at least partly 
nude, and each holds what appears to be a labeled 
star or is shown with the star attached to either 
arm by what could be a tether or cord of some 
kind. The last two pages of this section were lost 
(Aquarius and Capricornus, roughly January and 
February), while Aries and Taurus are split into 
four paired diagrams with 15 women and 15 stars 
each. Some of these diagrams are on fold-out 
pages. 

Biological, 20 folios: A dense continuous text 
interspersed with figures, mostly showing small 
nude women, some wearing crowns, bathing in pools 
or tubs connected by an elaborate network of 
pipes. The bifolio consists of folios 78 (verso) 
and 81 (recto); it forms an integrated design, 
with water flowing from one folio to the other. 

Cosmological, 13 folios: More circular diagrams, 
but they are of an obscure nature. This section 
also has foldouts; one of them spans six pages, 
commonly called the Rosettes folio, and contains a 
map or diagram with nine "islands" or "rosettes" 
connected by "causeways" and containing castles, 
as well as what might be a volcano. 

Pharmaceutical, 34 folios: Many labeled drawings 
of isolated plant parts (roots, leaves, etc.), 
objects resembling apothecary jars, ranging in 
style from the mundane to the fantastical, and a 
few text paragraphs. 

Recipes, 22 folios: Full pages of text broken into 
many short paragraphs, each marked with a star in 
the left margin. 

Five folios contain only text, and at least 28 
folios are missing from the manuscript. 

Purpose 

The overall impression given by the surviving 
leaves of the manuscript is that it was meant to 
serve as a pharmacopoeia or to address topics in 
medieval or early modern medicine. However, the 
puzzling details of illustrations have fueled many 
theories about the book's origin, the contents of 
its text, and the purpose for which it was 
intended. 

The first section of the book is almost certainly 
herbal, but attempts have failed to identify the 
plants, either with actual specimens or with the 
stylized drawings of contemporaneous herbals. Only 
a few of the plant drawings can be identified with 
reasonable certainty, such as a wild pansy and the 
maidenhair fern. The herbal pictures that match 
pharmacological sketches appear to be clean copies 
of them, except that missing parts were completed 
with improbable-looking details. In fact, many of 
the plant drawings in the herbal section seem to 
be composite: the roots of one species have been 
fastened to the leaves of another, with flowers 
from a third. 

Botanist Hugh O'Neill believed that one 
illustration depicted a New World sunflower, which 
would help date the manuscript and open up 
intriguing possibilities for its origin; 
unfortunately, the identification is only 
speculative. 

The basins and tubes in the "biological" section 
are sometimes interpreted as implying a connection 
to alchemy, yet they bear little obvious 
resemblance to the alchemical equipment of the 
period.[citation needed] 

Astrological considerations frequently played a 
prominent role in herb gathering, bloodletting, 
and other medical procedures common during the 
likeliest dates of the manuscript. However, 
interpretation remains speculative, apart from the 
obvious Zodiac symbols and one diagram possibly 
showing the classical planets. 

History 

Much of the early history of the book is unknown, 
though the text and illustrations are all 
characteristically European. In 2009, University 
of Arizona researchers performed radiocarbon 
dating on the manuscript's vellum and dated it 
between 1404 and 1438. In addition, McCrone 
Associates in Westmont, Illinois, found that the 
paints in the manuscript were of materials to be 
expected from that period of European history. It 
has been suggested that McCrone Associates found 
that much of the ink was added not long after the 
creation of the parchment, but the official report 
contains no statement to this effect. 

The first confirmed owner was Georg Baresch 
(1585–1662), an obscure alchemist from Prague. 
Baresch was apparently just as puzzled as modern 
scientists about this "Sphynx" that had been 
"taking up space uselessly in his library" for 
many years. He learned that Jesuit scholar 
Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) from the Collegio 
Romano had published a Coptic (Egyptian) 
dictionary and claimed to have deciphered the 
Egyptian hieroglyphs; Baresch twice sent a sample 
copy of the script to Kircher in Rome, asking for 
clues. His 1639 letter to Kircher is the earliest 
confirmed mention of the manuscript that has been 
found to date. 

It is not known whether Kircher answered the 
request, but he was apparently interested enough 
to try to acquire the book, which Baresch refused 
to yield. Upon Baresch's death, the manuscript 
passed to his friend Jan Marek Marci (1595–1667; 
also known as Johannes Marcus Marci), then rector 
of Charles University in Prague. A few years 
later, Marci sent the book to Kircher, his 
longtime friend and correspondent. 

A letter written on August 19, 1665 or 1666 was 
found inside the cover and accompanied the 
manuscript when Johannes Marcus sent it to 
Kircher. It claims that the book once belonged to 
Emperor Rudolf II (1552–1612), who paid 600 gold 
ducats (about 2.07 kg of gold) for it. The letter 
was written in Latin and has been translated to 
English. The book was then given or lent to 
Jacobus Horcicky de Tepenecz (died 1622), the head 
of Rudolf's botanical gardens in Prague, probably 
as part of the debt that Rudolf II owed upon his 
death. 

Marci's 1665/6 cover letter written in Latin was 
still with the manuscript when Voynich purchased 
it: 

Reverend and Distinguished Sir, Father in Christ: 

This book, bequeathed to me by an intimate friend, 
I destined for you, my very dear Athanasius, as 
soon as it came into my possession, for I was 
convinced that it could be read by no one except 
yourself. 

The former owner of this book asked your opinion 
by letter, copying and sending you a portion of 
the book from which he believed you would be able 
to read the remainder, but he at that time refused 
to send the book itself. To its deciphering he 
devoted unflagging toil, as is apparent from 
attempts of his which I send you herewith, and he 
relinquished hope only with his life. But his toil 
was in vain, for such Sphinxes as these obey no 
one but their master, Kircher. Accept now this 
token, such as it is and long overdue though it 
be, of my affection for you, and burst through its 
bars, if there are any, with your wonted success. 

Dr. Raphael, a tutor in the Bohemian language to 
Ferdinand III, then King of Bohemia, told me the 
said book belonged to the Emperor Rudolph and that 
he presented to the bearer who brought him the 
book 600 ducats. He believed the author was Roger 
Bacon, the Englishman. On this point I suspend 
judgement; it is your place to define for us what 
view we should take thereon, to whose favor and 
kindness I unreservedly commit myself and remain 

At the command of your Reverence, 

Joannes Marcus Marci of Cronland 

Prague, 19th August, 1665 (or 1666) 

No records of the book for the next 200 years have 
been found, but in all likelihood, it was stored 
with the rest of Kircher's correspondence in the 
library of the Collegio Romano (now the Pontifical 
Gregorian University). It probably remained there 
until the troops of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy 
captured the city in 1870 and annexed the Papal 
States. The new Italian government decided to 
confiscate many properties of the Church, 
including the library of the Collegio. Many books 
of the university's library were hastily 
transferred to the personal libraries of its 
faculty just before this happened, according to 
investigations by Xavier Ceccaldi and others, and 
those books were exempt from confiscation. 
Kircher's correspondence was among those books, 
and so, apparently, was the Voynich manuscript, as 
it still bears the ex libris of Petrus Beckx, head 
of the Jesuit order and the university's rector at 
the time. 

Beckx's private library was moved to the Villa 
Mondragone, Frascati, a large country palace near 
Rome that had been bought by the Society of Jesus 
in 1866 and housed the headquarters of the 
Jesuits' Ghislieri College. 

In 1903, the Society of Jesus (Collegio Romano) 
was short of money and decided to sell some of its 
holdings discreetly to the Vatican Library. 
Ruysschaert 1959 published a list of those books, 
which were for sale. The sale then took place in 
1912, but books listed for the sale were missing. 
Wilfrid Voynich acquired 30 of these manuscripts, 
among them the one which now bears his name. He 
spent the next seven years attempting to interest 
scholars in deciphering the script, while he 
worked to determine the origins of the manuscript. 

In 1930, the manuscript was inherited after 
Wilfrid's death by his widow Ethel Voynich, author 
of the novel The Gadfly and daughter of 
mathematician George Boole. She died in 1960 and 
left the manuscript to her close friend Anne Nill. 
In 1961, Nill sold the book to antique book dealer 
Hans P. Kraus. Kraus was unable to find a buyer 
and donated the manuscript to Yale University in 
1969, where it was catalogued as "MS 408," 
sometimes also referred to as "Beinecke MS 408." 

Timeline of ownership 

The timeline of ownership of the Voynich 
manuscript is given below. The commonly accepted 
owners of the 17th century are shown in orange; 
the long period of storage in the Collegio Romano 
is shown in yellow; the location where Wilfrid 
Voynich allegedly acquired the manuscript 
(Frascati) is shown in green; Voynich is shown in 
red; and modern owners are shown in blue. Periods 
of unknown ownership are indicated in white, and 
the time when it was possibly created in green, 
based on the carbon dating of the vellum. 

Timeline of Voynich manuscript ownership 

Authorship hypotheses 

Many people have been proposed as possible authors 
of the Voynich manuscript. 

Marci's 1665/6 cover letter to Kircher says that, 
according to his friend the late Raphael 
Mnishovsky, the book had once been bought by 
Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Bohemia 
(1552–1612) for 600 ducats (66.42 troy ounce 
actual gold weight, or 2.07 kg). (Mnishovsky had 
died in 1644, more than 20 years earlier, and the 
deal must have occurred before Rudolf's abdication 
in 1611, at least 55 years before Marci's letter.) 
According to the letter, Mnishovsky (but not 
necessarily Rudolf) speculated that the author was 
Franciscan friar and polymath Roger Bacon 
(1214–94). Marci said that he was suspending 
judgment about this claim, but it was taken quite 
seriously by Wilfrid Voynich who did his best to 
confirm it. Voynich contemplated the possibility 
that the author was Albertus Magnus if not Roger 
Bacon. However, Karl Widemann sold books to Rudolf 
II in March 1599. 

The assumption that Bacon was the author led 
Voynich to conclude that John Dee (1527–1608) 
sold the manuscript to Rudolf. Dee was a 
mathematician and astrologer at the court of Queen 
Elizabeth I of England who was known to have owned 
a large collection of Bacon's manuscripts. Dee and 
his scrier (spirit medium) Edward Kelley lived in 
Bohemia for several years, where they had hoped to 
sell their services to the emperor. However, this 
sale seems quite unlikely, according to John 
Schuster, because Dee's meticulously kept diaries 
do not mention it. If Bacon did not create the 
Voynich manuscript, a supposed connection to Dee 
is much weakened. It was thought possible, prior 
to the carbon dating of the manuscript, that Dee 
or Kelley might have written it and spread the 
rumor that it was originally a work of Bacon's in 
the hopes of later selling it. 

Fabrication by Voynich 

Some suspect Voynich of having fabricated the 
manuscript himself. As an antique book dealer, he 
probably had the necessary knowledge and means, 
and a lost book by Roger Bacon would have been 
worth a fortune. Furthermore, Baresch's letter and 
Marci's letter only establish the existence of a 
manuscript, not that the Voynich manuscript is the 
same one mentioned. These letters could possibly 
have been the motivation for Voynich to fabricate 
the manuscript, assuming that he was aware of 
them. However, many consider the expert internal 
dating of the manuscript and the June 1999 
discovery of Baresch's letter to Kircher as having 
eliminated this possibility. Eamon Duffy says that 
the radiocarbon dating of the parchment (or, more 
accurately, vellum) "effectively rules out any 
possibility that the manuscript is a post-medieval 
forgery", as the consistency of the pages 
indicates origin from a single source, and "it is 
inconceivable" that a quantity of unused parchment 
comprising "at least fourteen or fifteen entire 
calfskins" could have survived from the early 15th 
century. However, recent forgeries of Dead Sea 
Scrolls, which are based on 2,000-year-old leather 
as their “slate”, render pure carbon dating 
insufficient. 

Giovanni Fontana 

It has been suggested that some illustrations in 
the books оf an Italian engineer, Giovanni 
Fontana, slightly resemble Voynich illustrations. 
Fontana was familiar with cryptography and used it 
in his books, although he didn't use the Voynich 
script but a simple substitution cipher. In the 
book Secretum de thesauro experimentorum 
ymaginationis hominum (Secret of the treasure-room 
of experiments in man's imagination), written ca. 
1430, Fontana described mnemonic machines, written 
in his cypher. At least Bellicorum instrumentorum 
liber and this book used a cryptographic system, 
described as a simple, rational cipher, based on 
signs without letters or numbers. 

Other theories 

Sometime before 1921, Voynich was able to read a 
name faintly written at the foot of the 
manuscript's first page: "Jacobj à Tepenece". 
This is taken to be a reference to Jakub 
Hořčický of Tepenec (1575–1622), also known 
by his Latin name Jacobus Sinapius. Rudolph II had 
ennobled him in 1607, had appointed him his 
Imperial Distiller, and had made him curator of 
his botanical gardens as well as one of his 
personal physicians. Voynich (and many other 
people after him) concluded that Jacobus owned the 
Voynich manuscript prior to Baresch, and he drew a 
link from that to Rudolf's court, in confirmation 
of Mnishovsky's story. 

Jacobus's name is still clearly visible under 
ultraviolet light; however, it does not match the 
copy of his signature in a document located by Jan 
Hurych in 2003. As a result, it has been suggested 
that the signature was added later, possibly even 
fraudulently by Voynich himself. 

It has been noted that Baresch's letter bears some 
resemblance to a hoax that orientalist Andreas 
Mueller once played on Kircher. Mueller sent some 
unintelligible text to Kircher with a note 
explaining that it had come from Egypt, and asking 
him for a translation. Kircher reportedly solved 
it. It has been speculated that these were both 
cryptographic tricks played on Kircher to make him 
look foolish. 

Raphael Mnishovsky, the friend of Marci who was 
the reputed source of Bacon's story, was himself a 
cryptographer and apparently invented a cipher 
which he claimed was uncrackable (ca. 1618). This 
has led to the speculation that Mnishovsky might 
have produced the Voynich manuscript as a 
practical demonstration of his cipher and made 
Baresch his unwitting test subject. Indeed, the 
disclaimer in the Voynich manuscript cover letter 
could mean that Marci suspected some kind of 
deception. 

In his 2006 book, Nick Pelling proposed that the 
Voynich manuscript was written by 15th century 
North Italian architect Antonio Averlino (also 
known as "Filarete"), a theory broadly consistent 
with the radiocarbon dating. 

Language hypotheses 

Many hypotheses have been developed about the 
Voynich manuscript's "language", called 
Voynichese: 

Ciphers 

According to the "letter-based cipher" theory, the 
Voynich manuscript contains a meaningful text in 
some European language that was intentionally 
rendered obscure by mapping it to the Voynich 
manuscript "alphabet" through a cipher of some 
sort—an algorithm that operated on individual 
letters. This has been the working hypothesis for 
most 20th-century deciphering attempts, including 
an informal team of NSA cryptographers led by 
William F. Friedman in the early 1950s. 

The main argument for this theory is that it is 
difficult to explain a European author using a 
strange alphabet—except as an attempt to hide 
information. Indeed, even Roger Bacon knew about 
ciphers, and the estimated date for the manuscript 
roughly coincides with the birth of cryptography 
in Europe as a relatively systematic 
discipline.[citation needed] 

The counterargument is that almost all cipher 
systems consistent with that era fail to match 
what is seen in the Voynich manuscript. For 
example, simple substitution ciphers would be 
excluded because the distribution of letter 
frequencies does not resemble that of any known 
language; while the small number of different 
letter shapes used implies that nomenclator and 
homophonic ciphers would be ruled out, because 
these typically employ larger cipher alphabets. 
Polyalphabetic ciphers were invented by Alberti in 
the 1460s and included the later Vigenère cipher, 
but they usually yield ciphertexts where all 
cipher shapes occur with roughly equal 
probability, quite unlike the language-like letter 
distribution which the Voynich manuscript appears 
to have. 

However, the presence of many tightly grouped 
shapes in the Voynich manuscript (such as "or", 
"ar", "ol", "al", "an", "ain", "aiin", "air", 
"aiir", "am", "ee", "eee", among others) does 
suggest that its cipher system may make use of a 
"verbose cipher", where single letters in a 
plaintext get enciphered into groups of fake 
letters. For example, the first two lines of page 
f15v (seen above) contain "oror or" and "or or oro 
r", which strongly resemble how Roman numbers such 
as "CCC" or "XXXX" would look if verbosely 
enciphered. 

That the encryption system started from a 
fundamentally simple cipher and then augmented it 
by adding nulls (meaningless symbols), homophones 
(duplicate symbols), transposition cipher (letter 
rearrangement), false word breaks, and more is 
also entirely possible. 

Codes 

According to the "codebook cipher" theory, the 
Voynich manuscript "words" would actually be codes 
to be looked up in a "dictionary" or codebook. The 
main evidence for this theory is that the internal 
structure and length distribution of many words 
are similar to those of Roman numerals, which at 
the time would be a natural choice for the codes. 
However, book-based ciphers would be viable for 
only short messages, because they are very 
cumbersome to write and to read.[citation needed] 

Shorthand 

In 1943, Joseph Martin Feely claimed that the 
manuscript was a scientific diary written in 
shorthand. According to D’Imperio, this was 
“Latin, but in a system of abbreviated forms not 
considered acceptable by other scholars, who 
unanimously rejected his readings of the text”. 

Steganography 

This theory holds that the text of the Voynich 
manuscript is mostly meaningless, but contains 
meaningful information hidden in inconspicuous 
details—e.g., the second letter of every word, 
or the number of letters in each line. This 
technique, called steganography, is very old and 
was described by Johannes Trithemius in 1499. 
Though the plain text was speculated to have been 
extracted by a Cardan grille (an overlay with 
cut-outs for the meaningful text) of some sort, 
this seems somewhat unlikely because the words and 
letters are not arranged on anything like a 
regular grid. Still, steganographic claims are 
hard to prove or disprove, since stegotexts can be 
arbitrarily hard to find. 

It has been suggested that the meaningful text 
could be encoded in the length or shape of certain 
pen strokes. There are indeed examples of 
steganography from about that time that use letter 
shape (italic vs. upright) to hide information. 
However, when examined at high magnification, the 
Voynich manuscript pen strokes seem quite natural, 
and substantially affected by the uneven surface 
of the vellum.[citation needed] 

Natural language 

Statistical analysis of the text reveals patterns 
similar to those of natural languages. For 
instance, the word entropy (about 10 bits per 
word) is similar to that of English or Latin 
texts. In 2013, Diego Amancio et al argued that 
the Voynich manuscript "is mostly compatible with 
natural languages and incompatible with random 
texts". 

The linguist Jacques Guy once suggested that the 
Voynich manuscript text could be some little-known 
natural language, written in the plain with an 
invented alphabet. The word structure is similar 
to that of many language families of East and 
Central Asia, mainly Sino-Tibetan (Chinese, 
Tibetan, and Burmese), Austroasiatic (Vietnamese, 
Khmer, etc.) and possibly Tai (Thai, Lao, etc.). 
In many of these languages, the words have only 
one syllable; and syllables have a rather rich 
structure, including tonal patterns. 

This theory has some historical plausibility. 
While those languages generally had native 
scripts, these were notoriously difficult for 
Western visitors. This difficulty motivated the 
invention of several phonetic scripts, mostly with 
Latin letters, but sometimes with invented 
alphabets. Although the known examples are much 
later than the Voynich manuscript, history records 
hundreds of explorers and missionaries who could 
have done it—even before Marco Polo's 
13th-century journey, but especially after Vasco 
da Gama sailed the sea route to the Orient in 
1499. 

The main argument for this theory is that it is 
consistent with all statistical properties of the 
Voynich manuscript text which have been tested so 
far, including doubled and tripled words (which 
have been found to occur in Chinese and Vietnamese 
texts at roughly the same frequency as in the 
Voynich manuscript). It also explains the apparent 
lack of numerals and Western syntactic features 
(such as articles and copulas), and the general 
inscrutability of the illustrations. Another 
possible hint is two large red symbols on the 
first page, which have been compared to a 
Chinese-style book title, inverted and badly 
copied. Also, the apparent division of the year 
into 360 days (rather than 365 days), in groups of 
15 and starting with Pisces, are features of the 
Chinese agricultural calendar (jie qi, 節氣). 
The main argument against the theory is the fact 
that no one (including scholars at the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences in Beijing) has been able to 
find any clear examples of Asian symbolism or 
Asian science in the illustrations. 

In 1976, James R Child of the National Security 
Agency, a linguist of Indo-European languages, 
proposed that the manuscript was written in a 
"hitherto unknown North Germanic dialect". He 
identified in the manuscript a "skeletal syntax 
several elements of which are reminiscent of 
certain Germanic languages", while the content 
itself is expressed using "a great deal of 
obscurity". 

In February 2014, Professor Stephen Bax of the 
University of Bedfordshire made public his 
research into using "bottom up" methodology to 
understand the manuscript. His method involves 
looking for and translating proper nouns, in 
association with relevant illustrations, in the 
context of other languages of the same time 
period. A paper he posted online offers tentative 
translation of 14 characters and 10 words. He 
suggests the text is a treatise on nature written 
in a natural language, rather than a code. 

In 2014, Arthur O. Tucker and Rexford H. Talbert 
published a paper claiming a positive 
identification of 37 plants, six animals, and one 
mineral referenced in the manuscript to plant 
drawings in the Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum 
Herbis or Badianus manuscript, a fifteenth century 
Aztec herbal. Together with the presence of 
atacamite in the paint, they argue that the plants 
were from Colonial New Spain and represented the 
Nahuatl language, and date the manuscript to 
between 1521 (the date of the Conquest) and circa 
1576, in contradiction of radiocarbon dating 
evidence of the vellum and many other elements of 
the manuscript. However, the vellum, while 
creation of it was dated earlier, could just have 
been stored and used at a later date for 
manuscript making. The analysis has been 
criticized by other Voynich manuscript 
researchers, pointing out that—among other 
things—a skilled forger could construct plants 
that have a passing resemblance to theretofore 
undiscovered existing plants. 

In 2014, a team lead by Dr. Diego Amancio of the 
University of São Paulo's Institute of 
Mathematical and Computer Sciences published a 
paper detailing a study using statistical methods 
to analyse the relationships of the words in the 
text. Instead of trying to find the meaning, 
Amancio's team used complex network modelling to 
look for connections and clusters of words. By 
employing concepts such as frequency and 
intermittence, which measure occurrence and 
concentration of a term in the text, Amancio was 
able to discover the manuscript's keywords and 
create three-dimensional models of the text's 
structure and word frequencies. Their conclusion 
was that in 90% of cases, the Voynich systems are 
similar to those of other known books such as the 
Bible, indicating that the book is an actual piece 
of text in an actual language, and not 
well-planned gibberish. 

The use of the framework was exemplified with the 
analysis of the Voynich manuscript, with the final 
conclusion that it differs from a random sequence 
of words, being compatible with natural languages. 
Even though our approach is not aimed at 
deciphering Voynich, it was capable of providing 
keywords that could be helpful for decipherers in 
the future. 

Constructed language 

See also: Philosophical language 

The peculiar internal structure of Voynich 
manuscript words led William F. Friedman to 
conjecture that the text could be a constructed 
language. In 1950, Friedman asked the British army 
officer John Tiltman to analyze a few pages of the 
text, but Tiltman did not share this conclusion. 
In a paper in 1967, Brigadier Tiltman said: 

After reading my report, Mr. Friedman disclosed to 
me his belief that the basis of the script was a 
very primitive form of synthetic universal 
language such as was developed in the form of a 
philosophical classification of ideas by Bishop 
Wilkins in 1667 and Dalgarno a little later. It 
was clear that the productions of these two men 
were much too systematic, and anything of the kind 
would have been almost instantly recognisable. My 
analysis seemed to me to reveal a cumbersome 
mixture of different kinds of substitution. 

The concept of an constructed language is quite 
old, as attested by John Wilkins's Philosophical 
Language (1668), but still postdates the generally 
accepted origin of the Voynich manuscript by two 
centuries. In most known examples, categories are 
subdivided by adding suffixes; as a consequence, a 
text in a particular subject would have many words 
with similar prefixes—for example, all plant 
names would begin with similar letters, and 
likewise for all diseases, etc. This feature could 
then explain the repetitious nature of the Voynich 
text. However, no one has been able yet to assign 
a plausible meaning to any prefix or suffix in the 
Voynich manuscript. 

Hoax 

The unusual features of the Voynich manuscript 
text (such as the doubled and tripled words), and 
the suspicious contents of its illustrations 
support the idea that the manuscript is a hoax. In 
other words, if no one is able to extract meaning 
from the book, then perhaps this is because the 
document contains no meaningful content in the 
first place. Various hoax theories have been 
proposed over time. 

In 2003, computer scientist Gordon Rugg showed 
that text with characteristics similar to the 
Voynich manuscript could have been produced using 
a table of word prefixes, stems, and suffixes, 
which would have been selected and combined by 
means of a perforated paper overlay. The latter 
device, known as a Cardan grille, was invented 
around 1550 as an encryption tool, more than 100 
years after the estimated creation date of the 
Voynich manuscript. Some maintain that the 
similarity between the pseudo-texts generated in 
Gordon Rugg's experiments and the Voynich 
manuscript is superficial, and the grille method 
could be used to emulate any language to a certain 
degree. 

In April 2007, a study by Austrian researcher 
Andreas Schinner published in Cryptologia 
supported the hoax hypothesis. Schinner showed 
that the statistical properties of the 
manuscript's text were more consistent with 
meaningless gibberish produced using a 
quasi-stochastic method such as the one described 
by Rugg, than with Latin and medieval German 
texts. 

Some scholars have claimed that the manuscript's 
text appears too sophisticated to be a hoax. In 
2013 Marcelo Montemurro, a theoretical physicist 
from the University of Manchester published 
findings claiming that semantic networks such as 
content-bearing words occurring in a clustered 
pattern, and new words being used when there was a 
shift in topic exist in the text of the 
manuscript. With this evidence, he believes it 
unlikely that these features were intentionally 
"incorporated" into the text to make a hoax more 
realistic, as most of the required academic 
knowledge of these structures did not exist at the 
time the Voynich manuscript would have been 
written. 

In September 2016, Gordon Rugg and Gavin Taylor 
addressed these objections in another article in 
Cryptologia, and illustrated a simple hoax method 
that they claim could have caused the mathematical 
properties of the text. 

Glossolalia 

In their 2004 book, Gerry Kennedy and Rob 
Churchill suggest the possibility that the Voynich 
manuscript may be a case of glossolalia 
(speaking-in-tongues), channeling, or outsider 
art. If so, the author felt compelled to write 
large amounts of text in a manner which resembles 
stream of consciousness, either because of voices 
heard or because of an urge. This often takes 
place in an invented language in glossolalia, 
usually made up of fragments of the author's own 
language, although invented scripts for this 
purpose are rare. 

Kennedy and Churchill use Hildegard von Bingen's 
works to point out similarities between the 
Voynich manuscript and the illustrations that she 
drew when she was suffering from severe bouts of 
migraine, which can induce a trance-like state 
prone to glossolalia. Prominent features found in 
both are abundant "streams of stars", and the 
repetitive nature of the "nymphs" in the 
biological section. This theory has been found 
unlikely by other researchers. 

The theory is virtually impossible to prove or 
disprove, short of deciphering the text. Kennedy 
and Churchill are themselves not convinced of the 
hypothesis, but consider it plausible. In the 
culminating chapter of their work, Kennedy states 
his belief that it is a hoax or forgery. Churchill 
acknowledges the possibility that the manuscript 
is a synthetic forgotten language (as advanced by 
Friedman) or a forgery as preeminent theories. 
However, he concludes that, if the manuscript is 
genuine, mental illness or delusion seems to have 
affected the author. 

Decipherment claims 

Since the manuscript's modern rediscovery in 1912, 
there have been a number of claimed decipherings. 

William Romaine Newbold 

One of the earliest efforts to unlock the book's 
secrets (and the first of many premature claims of 
decipherment) was made in 1921 by William Romaine 
Newbold of the University of Pennsylvania. His 
singular hypothesis held that the visible text is 
meaningless itself, but that each apparent 
"letter" is in fact constructed of a series of 
tiny markings discernible only under 
magnification. These markings were supposed to be 
based on ancient Greek shorthand, forming a second 
level of script that held the real content of the 
writing. Newbold claimed to have used this 
knowledge to work out entire paragraphs proving 
the authorship of Bacon and recording his use of a 
compound microscope four hundred years before van 
Leeuwenhoek. A circular drawing in the 
"astronomical" section depicts an irregularly 
shaped object with four curved arms, which Newbold 
interpreted as a picture of a galaxy, which could 
be obtained only with a telescope. Similarly, he 
interpreted other drawings as cells seen through a 
microscope. 

However, Newbold's analysis has since been 
dismissed as overly speculative after John 
Matthews Manly of the University of Chicago 
pointed out serious flaws in his theory. Each 
shorthand character was assumed to have multiple 
interpretations, with no reliable way to determine 
which was intended for any given case. Newbold's 
method also required rearranging letters at will 
until intelligible Latin was produced. These 
factors alone ensure the system enough flexibility 
that nearly anything at all could be discerned 
from the microscopic markings. Although evidence 
of micrography using the Hebrew language can be 
traced as far back as the ninth century, it is 
nowhere near as compact or complex as the shapes 
Newbold made out. Close study of the manuscript 
revealed the markings to be artifacts caused by 
the way ink cracks as it dries on rough vellum. 
Perceiving significance in these artifacts can be 
attributed to pareidolia. Thanks to Manly's 
thorough refutation, the micrography theory is now 
generally disregarded. 

Joseph Martin Feely 

In 1943, Joseph Martin Feely published Roger 
Bacon's Cipher: The Right Key Found, in which he 
claimed that the book was a scientific diary 
written by Roger Bacon. Feely's method posited 
that the text was a highly abbreviated medieval 
Latin written in a simple substitution cipher. 

Leonell C Strong 

Leonell C. Strong, a cancer research scientist and 
amateur cryptographer, believed that the solution 
to the Voynich manuscript was a "peculiar double 
system of arithmetical progressions of a multiple 
alphabet". Strong claimed that the plaintext 
revealed the Voynich manuscript to be written by 
the 16th-century English author Anthony Ascham, 
whose works include A Little Herbal, published in 
1550. Notes released after his death reveal that 
the last stages of his analysis, in which he 
selected words to combine into phrases, was 
questionably subjective. 

Robert S Brumbaugh 

In 1978 Robert Brumbaugh, a professor of medieval 
philosophy at Yale University, claimed that the 
manuscript was a forgery intended to fool Emperor 
Rudolf II into purchasing it, and that the text is 
Latin enciphered with a complex, two-step method. 

John Stojko 

In 1978, John Stojko published Letters to God's 
Eye in which he claimed that the Voynich 
Manuscript was a series of letters written in 
vowelless Ukrainian. The theory caused some 
sensation among Ukrainian diaspora at the time, 
and then in independent Ukraine after 1991. 
However, the date Stojko gives for the letters, 
the lack of relation between the text and the 
images, and the general looseness in the method of 
decryption all speak against his theory. 

Leo Levitov 

Leo Levitov proposed in his 1987 book, Solution of 
the Voynich Manuscript: A Liturgical Manual for 
the Endura Rite of the Cathari Heresy, the Cult of 
Isis, that the manuscript is a handbook for the 
Cathar rite of Endura written in a Flemish based 
creole. He further claimed that Catharism was 
descended from the cult of Isis. 

However, Levitov's decipherment has been refuted 
on several grounds, not least of which being 
unhistorical. Levitov had a poor grasp on the 
history of the Cathars, and his depiction of 
Endura as an elaborate suicide ritual is at odds 
with surviving documents describing it as a fast. 
Likewise, there is no known link between Catharism 
and Isis. 

Stephen Bax 

In 2014, expert in applied linguistics Professor 
Stephen Bax published an article in which he 
claimed to have translated ten words from the 
manuscript using techniques similar to those used 
to successfully translate Egyptian hieroglyphs. He 
claimed the manuscript to be a treatise on nature, 
in a Near Eastern or Asian language, but no full 
translation was made before his death in 2017. 

Nicholas Gibbs 

In September 2017, television writer Nicholas 
Gibbs claimed to have decoded the manuscript as 
idiosyncratically abbreviated Latin. 

Medieval scholars judged Gibbs' hypothesis to be 
not novel. Gibbs' work was criticized as patching 
together already-existing scholarship and 
providing a highly speculative and incorrect 
translation; Lisa Fagin Davis, director of the 
Medieval Academy of America, stated that Gibbs' 
decipherment "doesn’t result in Latin that makes 
sense." 

Greg Kondrak 

Professor Greg Kondrak, a natural language 
processing expert of the University of Alberta, 
together with his graduate student Bradley Hauer, 
used Artificial Intelligence in an attempt to 
decode the manuscript. Their findings were 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics in 2017, in the form 
of an article suggesting that the language of the 
manuscript is most likely Hebrew, but encoded 
using alphagrams, i.e. alphabetically ordered 
anagrams. However, the team admitted that experts 
in medieval manuscripts who reviewed the work were 
not convinced. The claim is also disputed by an 
expert in Hebrew and its history. 

Facsimile 

Many books and articles have been written about 
the manuscript. Copies of the manuscript pages 
were made by alchemist Georgius Barschius in 1637 
and sent to Athanasius Kircher, and later by 
Wilfrid Voynich. 

In 2004, the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript 
Library made high-resolution digital scans 
publicly available online, and several printed 
facsimiles appeared. In 2016, the Beinecke Library 
and Yale University Press co-published a 
facsimile, The Voynich Manuscript, with scholarly 
essays. 

The Beinecke Library also authorized the 
production of a print run of 898 replicas by the 
Spanish publisher Siloé in 2017. 

Cultural influence 

The manuscript has also inspired several works of 
fiction, including The Book of Blood and Shadow 
(2012) by Robin Wasserman, Time Riders: The 
Doomsday Code (2011) by Alex Scarrow, Codex (2004) 
by Lev Grossman, PopCo (2004) by Scarlett Thomas, 
Prime (2013) by Jeremy Robinson with Sean Ellis, 
The Sword of Moses (2013) by Dominic Selwood, The 
Return of the Lloigor (1974) by Colin Wilson, 
Datura tai harha jonka jokainen näkee (2001) 
(Eng: Datura: or, A Delusion We All See, 2013) by 
Leena Krohn, Assassin's Code (2012) by Jonathan 
Maberry, The Book of Life (2014) by Deborah 
Harkness, The 39 Clues: Trust No One (2012) by 
Linda Sue Park and The Source (2008) by Michael 
Cordy. 

Between 1976 and 1978, Italian artist Luigi 
Serafini created the Codex Seraphinianus 
containing false writing and pictures of imaginary 
plants, in a style reminiscent of the Voynich 
manuscript. 

Contemporary classical composer Hanspeter Kyburz's 
1995 Chamber work The Voynich Cipher Manuscript, 
for chorus & ensemble is inspired by the 
manuscript. 

In 2015, the New Haven Symphony Orchestra 
commissioned Hannah Lash to compose a symphony 
inspired by the manuscript. 

